As the chapter continues a turtle, which appears and reappears several times early in the novel, can be seen to stand for survival, a driving life force in all of mankind that cannot be beaten by nature or man.  The turtle represents a hope that the trip to the west is survivable by the farmer migrants (Joad family).  The turtle further represents the migrants struggles against nature/man by overcoming every obstacle he encounters: the red ant in his path, the truck driver who tries to run over him, being captured in Tom Joad's jacket: And now a light truck approached, and as it came near, the driver saw the turtle and swerved to hit it.  The driver of the truck works for a large company, who try to stop the migrants from going west, when the driver attempts to hit the turtle it is another example of the big powerful guy trying to flatten or kill the little guy. Everything the turtle encounters trys its best to stop the turtle from making its westerly journey.  Steadily the turtle advances on, ironically to the southwest, the direction of the mirgration of people.  The turtle is described as being lasting, ancient, old and wise: horny head, yellowed toenails, indestructible high dome of a shell, humorous old eyes.  (Chp 1)
The driver of the truck, red ant and Tom Joad's jacket are all symbolic of nature and man the try to stop the turtle from continuing his journey westward to the promise land.  The turtle helps to develop the theme by showing its struggle against life/ comparing it with the Joad struggle against man.
The grapes seem to symbolize both bitterness and copiousness.  Grandpa the oldest member of the Joad family talks of the grapes as symbols of plenty; all his descriptions of what he is going to do with the grapes in California suggest contentment, freedom, the goal for which the Joad family strive for:   I'm gonna let the juice run down ma face, bath in the dammed grapes  (Chp 4)
The grapes that are talked about by Grandpa help to elaborate the theme by showing that no matter how nice everything seems in California the truth is that their beauty is only skin deep, in their souls they are rotten.  The rotten core verses the beautiful appearance.
The willow tree that is located on the Joad's farm represents the Joad family.  The willow is described as being unmovable and never bending to the wind or dust.  The Joad family does not want to move, they prefer to stay on the land they grew up on, much the same as the willow does.  The willow contributes to the theme by showing the unwillingness of the people to be removed from their land by the banks. The latter represents the force making them leave their homes. Both of these symbols help contribute to the theme by showing a struggle between each other.  The tree struggles against nature in much the same way that the Joad family struggles against the Bank and large companies.	
The rains that comes at the end of the novel symbolize several things. Rain in which is excessive, in a certain way fulfills a cycle of the dust which is also excessive.  In a way nature has restored a balance and has initiated a new growth cycle.  This ties in with other examples of the rebirth idea in the ending, much in the way the Joad family will grow again.  The rain contributes to the theme by showing the cycle of nature that give a conclusion to the novel by showing that life is a pattern of birth and death.  The rain is another example of nature against man, the rain comes and floods the living quarters of the Joads.  The Joads try to stop the flood of their home by yet again are forced back when nature drops a tree causing a flood of water to ruin their home forcing them to move.  In opposite way rain can helpful to give life to plants that need it to live.  Depending on which extreme the rain is in, it can be harmful or helpful. This is true for man, man can become both extremes bad or good depending on his choosing.
