The willow tree that is located on the Joad's farm represents the Joad family.  The willow is described as being unmovable and never bending to the wind or dust.  The Joad family does not want to move, they prefer to stay on the land they grew up on, much the same as the willow does.  The willow contributes to the theme by showing the unwillingness of the people to be removed from their land by the banks. The latter represents the force making them leave their homes. Both of these symbols help contribute to the theme by showing a struggle between each other.  The tree struggles against nature in much the same way that the Joad family struggles against the Bank and large companies.	
The rains that comes at the end of the novel symbolize several things. Rain in which is excessive, in a certain way fulfills a cycle of the dust which is also excessive.  In a way nature has restored a balance and has initiated a new growth cycle.  This ties in with other examples of the rebirth idea in the ending, much in the way the Joad family will grow again.  The rain contributes to the theme by showing the cycle of nature that give a conclusion to the novel by showing that life is a pattern of birth and death.  The rain is another example of nature against man, the rain comes and floods the living quarters of the Joads.  The Joads try to stop the flood of their home by yet again are forced back when nature drops a tree causing a flood of water to ruin their home forcing them to move.  In opposite way rain can helpful to give life to plants that need it to live.  Depending on which extreme the rain is in, it can be harmful or helpful. This is true for man, man can become both extremes bad or good depending on his choosing.
Throughout the novel there are several symbols used to develop the theme man verses a hostile environment.   Each symbol used in the novel show examples of both extremes.  Some represent man, that struggles against the environment, others paint a clear picture of the feelings of the migrants.  As each symbol is presented chronologically through the novel, they come together at the end to paint a clear picture of the conditions, treatment and feelings the people (migrants) as they make there journey through the novel to the West.
